---
title : "WIL08"
date : 10/11/2022
categories : SWJG WIL
---

## CS6200

### P1L1

#### Theory + Practice

Sequence of Programming Projects:

- threads, concurrency, and synchronization
- single-node OS mechanisms
    - inter-process communication, scheduling
- multi-node OS mechanisms
    - remote procedure calls(RPC)
- experimented design and evaluation

> Programming in C in Linux

### P1L2

- What is an operating system?
    - A special piece of software that...
        - Abstracts(to simplify what the hardware actually looks like) and Arbitrates(to manage, to oversee, to control the hardware use)
    - ...the use of a computer system.
- What are key components of an operating system?
- Design and implementation considerations of perating systems

#### Visual metaphor

> An operating system is like a... toy shop manager

- Directs operational resources
    - OS : control use of CPU, memory, peripheral devices...
    - Manager : control use of employee time, parts, tools...
- Enforces working policies
    - OS : eg, fair resouce access, limits to resource usage...
    - Manager : fairness, safety, clean-up
- Mitigates(완화시키다) difficulty of complex tasks
    - OS : abstract hardware details(system calls)
    - Manager : simplifies operation & optimizes performance

#### What is an Operating System?

An operating system is a layer of systems software(between hardware and application) that:

- directly has privileged access to the underlying hardware;
- hides the hardware complexity;
- manages hardware on behalf of one of more applications according to some predefined policies
- In addition, it ensures that applications are isolated and protected from one another.

#### OS Elements

- Abstractions
    - process, thread; correspond to the applications that the perating system executes
    - file, socket, memory page; correspond to the hardware resources that the perating systems need to manage

- Mechanisms
    - create, schedule
    - open, write, allocate

- Policies
    - least-recently used(LRU), earliest deadline first(EDF)

#### OS Elements: memory management Example

- Abstractions : memory page
- Mechanism : allocate, map to a process
- Policies : least recently used(LRU)

#### Design Principles

- Separation of mechanism & policiy
    - implement flexible mechanisms to support many policies
    - e.g., LRU(Least Recently Used), LFU(Least frequently Used), random
- Optimize for common case
    - where will the OS be used?
    - what will the user want to execute on that machine?
    - what are the workload requirements?

#### User/Kernel Protection Boundary

- User/Kernel Transitions
    - hardware supported
        - e.g., traps on illegal instructions or memory accesses requiring special privilege.
    - involves a number of instructions
        - e.g., on a 2GHz machine running Linux, it can take 50~100ns to perform all the operations that are necessary around a user/kernel transition
    - switches locality
        - affects hardware cache!!
    - __are not cheap__

#### Basic OS Services

- process management
- file management
- device management
- memory management
- storage management
- security

#### monolithic(일체형) OS

- plus
    - everything included
    - inlining, compile-time optimizations

- minus
    - customization, portability, manageability...
    - memory footprint
    - performance

#### modular OS

- plus
    - maintability
    - smaller footprint
    - less resource needs

- minus
    - indirection can impact performance
    - maintenance can still be an issue

> 단점이 명확해도 monolithic보단 좋다.

#### microkernel

- plus
    - size
    - verifiability

- minus
    - portability
    - complexity of software development
    - cost of user/kernel crossing

#### Summary : Introduction to Operating Systems

- OS elements
    - abstractions, mechanisms, and policies
- Communication between applications and OS via system calls
- OS organiztions
    - Linux and Mac OS

### P2L1 Processes and Process Management

- What is a process?
- How are processes represented by OS's?
- How are multiple concurrent processes managed by OS's?

#### Simple Process Definition

- Instance of an executing program
- Synonymous with "task" or "job"

#### Visual Metaphor

> A process is like an order of toys

- State of execution
    - program counter, stack
    - completed toys, waiting to be built
- Parts & temporary holding area
    - data, register state occupies static in memory
    - plastic pieces, containers
- may require special hardware
    - I/O devices
    - sewing machine, glue gun

#### what is a Process?

OS manages Hardware on behalf of application.

- application == program on disk, flash memory... (__static entity__)
- process == state of a program when executing loaded in memory(__active entity__)

#### what is a Process Control Block(PCB)?

| Process Control Block |
| --------------------- |
| process state         |
| process number        |
| program counter       |
| __registers__         |
| memory limits         |
| list of open files    |
| priority              |
| signal mask           |
| CPU scheduling info   |
| ...                   |


- PCB created when process is created. 
- Certain fields are updated when process state changes(e.g., request additional memory)
- other fields change too frequently

#### How is a PCB used?

#### what is a Context Switch?

- __context switch__
    - switching the CPU from the context of one process to the context of another
- they are expensive!
    - __direct costs__ : number of cycles for load & store instructions
    - __indirect costs__ : COLD cache! cache misses! (Context Switch가 일어나는 동안 캐시를 사용하지 않아서)

> LIMIT HOW FREQUENTLY CONTEXT SWITCHING IS DONE!

#### Hot Cache Quiz

For the following sentence, check all options that correctly complete it :  
when a cache is hot :  

- [ ] it can malfunction so we must context switch to another process
- [X] most process data is in the cache so the process performance will be at its best
- [X] sometimes we must context switch

#### Process Lifecycle

- Processes can be running or idle

#### Process state Quiz

The CPU is able to execute a process when the process is in which state?

running, ready

#### Process creation

#### Parent Process Quiz

On UNIX-based OSs, which process is often regared as "the parent of all processes"?

- init

Extra credit: On the Android OS, which process is regarded as "the parent of all App processes"?

- zygote

#### what is the role of the CPU scheduler?

A __CPU scheduler__ determines __which one__ of the currently ready processes will be __dispatched__ to the CPU to start running, and __how long__ it should run for.

- OS must... be efficient!
    - __preempt__ == interrupt and save current context
    - __schedule__ == run scheduler to choose next process
    - __dispatch__ == dispatch process & switch into its context

#### Length of Process

- How long should a process run for? How frequently should we run the scheduler?
    - Tp : processing time, t_sched : scheduling time

- Useful CPU work: == Total processing time/Total time = (2*Tp)/(2*Tp + 2*t_sched)
    - if Tp == t_sched > 50% of CPU time spent on useful work
    - if Tp == 10*t_sched > 91% of CPU time spent on useful work
- timeslice == time Tp allocated to a proces on the CPU

- Scheduling Design Decisions:
    - what are appropriate timeslice values?
    - metrics to choose next process to run?

#### what about I/O?

#### scheduler responsibility Quiz

which of the following are not a responsibility of the CPU scheduler?

- [X] maintaining the I/O queue
- [ ] maintaining the ready queue
- [ ] decision on when to context switch
- [X] decision on when to generate an event that a process is waiting on

#### Can Processes Interact? Yes

- IPC(Inter Process Communication) mechanisms:
    - transfer data/info between address spaces
    - maintain protection and isolation
    - provide flexibility and performance
- message-passing IPC
    - OS provides communication channel, like shared buffer
    - Processes write(send)/Read(receive) messages to/from channel
    - plus : OS manages
    - minus : overheads
- shared memory IPC
    - OS establishes a shared channel and maps it into each process address space
    - Processes directly read/write from this memory
    - plus : OS is out of the way!
    - minus : (re)implement code

#### P2L1 Summary

- Processes and Process Management
    - Process and process-related abstractions
        - address space and PCB
    - Basic mechanisms for managing process resources
        - context switching, process creation, scheduling, interprocess communicating

#### visual metaphor

a __thread__ is like a worker in a toy shop

- is an active entity
    - executing unit of a process
    - executing unit of toy order
- works simultaneously with others
    - many threads executing
    - many workers completing toy orders
- requires coordination
    - sharing of I/O devices, CPUs, memory
    - sharing of tools, parts, workstations

#### Process vs Thread

